# Chest Injuries and Disorders

Source: MedlinePlus (medlineplus.gov)
Matched condition: Fracture of rib (SNOMED-CT 33737001)
Link: https://medlineplus.gov/chestinjuriesanddisorders.html?utm_source=mplusconnect&utm_medium=service

What is the chest?
The chest is the part of your body between your neck and your abdomen (belly). The medical term for your chest is thorax. 

Your chest holds many important structures for breathing, digestion, blood circulation, and other important body functions. These structures include your: 

Ribs and breastbone
Esophagus, the tube between your mouth and stomach
Trachea, your windpipe
Bronchi, the tubes that carry air from your windpipe to your lungs
Lungs
Pleura, a thin layer of tissue that covers the lungs and lines the inside wall of the chest space
Heart and large blood vessels
Thymus, a gland that's part of your immune system
Nerves


What are chest injuries and disorders?
Chest injuries and disorders are problems that affect any of the organs or structures located in your chest. 

There are many types of chest injuries and disorders, for example:

Broken ribs
Esophagus disorders
Swallowing disorders, also called dysphagia
Tracheal disorders
Bronchial disorders
Lung diseases and collapsed lung
Pleural disorders
Heart diseases
Mediastinal diseases, which are tumors, inflammation, and other problems with the structures in the mediastinum, which is the space between your lungs, breastbone, and spine
Thoracic aortic aneurysm
Thoracic outlet syndrome


Chest injuries may happen from the force of car accidents, falls, or sports injuries. Or the chest may be pierced by a bullet or sharp object. Because your chest holds so many important structures, certain chest injuries may be life-threatening.  

How are chest injuries and disorders diagnosed?
Diagnosis of chest injuries or disorders depends on the type of symptoms you're having and whether you've had a chest injury. Injuries are usually obvious, but in most cases, you'll need tests to know how serious an injury is.

There are many types of tests for diagnosing different types of chest injuries and disorders, for example:  

Diagnostic imaging tests
Heart tests
Lung function tests
Bronchoscopy
Pleural fluid analysis
Dysphagia tests
Biopsy


Treatments will depend on the type of chest injury or disorder you have.