# Triglycerides

Source: MedlinePlus (medlineplus.gov)
Matched condition: Hypertriglyceridemia (disorder) (SNOMED-CT 302870006)
Link: https://medlineplus.gov/triglycerides.html?utm_source=mplusconnect&utm_medium=service

What are triglycerides?
Triglycerides are a type of fat. They are the most common type of fat in your body. They come from foods, especially butter, oils, and other fats you eat. Triglycerides also come from extra calories. These are the calories that you eat, but your body does not need right away.
Your body changes these extra calories into triglycerides and stores them in fat cells. When your body needs energy, it releases the triglycerides. Your VLDL cholesterol particles carry the triglycerides to your tissues.

Having a high level of triglycerides can raise your risk of heart diseases, such as coronary artery disease.

What causes high triglycerides?
Factors that can raise your triglyceride level include:
Regularly eating more calories than you burn off, especially if you eat a lot of sugar
Being overweight or having obesity
Cigarette smoking
Excessive alcohol use
Certain medicines
Some genetic disorders
Thyroid diseases
Poorly controlled type 2 diabetes
Liver or kidney diseases


How are high triglycerides diagnosed?
There is a blood test that measures your triglycerides, along with your cholesterol. Triglyceride levels are measured in milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL). The guidelines for triglyceride levels are


    
       
        Category
        Triglyceride Level
      
    
    
      
        Normal
        Less than 150mg/dL
      
      
        Borderline high
        150 to 199 mg/dL
      
      
        High
        200 to 499 mg/dL
      
      
        Very high
        500 mg/dL and above
      
    



Levels above 150mg/dl may raise your risk for heart disease. A triglyceride level of 150 mg/dL or higher is also a risk factor for metabolic syndrome.

What are the treatments for high triglycerides?
You may be able to lower your triglyceride levels with lifestyle changes:
Controlling your weight
Regular physical activity
Not smoking
Limiting sugar and refined foods
Limiting alcohol
Switching from saturated fats to healthier fats


Some people will also need to take cholesterol medicines to lower their triglycerides.