# Childbirth

Source: MedlinePlus (medlineplus.gov)
Matched condition: Instrumental delivery (SNOMED-CT 236974004)
Link: https://medlineplus.gov/childbirth.html?utm_source=mplusconnect&utm_medium=service

What is childbirth?
Childbirth is the process of giving birth to a baby. It includes labor and delivery of the fetus and the placenta. The placenta is the organ that supplies food and oxygen through the umbilical cord to your fetus during pregnancy. 

A full-term pregnancy is 40 weeks. Labor usually begins between 37 and 42 weeks of pregnancy. It is how your body prepares to give birth to your baby. Preterm labor can start before 37 completed weeks of pregnancy. It can lead to premature birth. Premature babies may face serious health risks.

How do I know if I'm going into labor?
Signs that you might be going into labor include:

Regular contractions start to come closer together
Leaking fluid or bleeding from the vagina
Low, dull backache
Abdominal (belly) cramps


The signs of labor, when labor starts, and the time it takes to deliver your baby can vary with each pregnancy. Call your health care provider if you have any signs of labor, even if it is before your due date. 

What are the stages of labor?
Labor happens in three stages.
 
The first stage begins with contractions. This stage could last for hours or days. It continues until your cervix has become thinner and dilated (stretched) to about 4 inches wide to allow your baby to pass through.
The second stage is when you begin to push downward. Crowning is when your baby's scalp comes into view. Shortly afterward, your baby is born. 
The third stage is when you deliver the placenta, and your provider cuts the umbilical cord. 


Sometimes, mothers need to have labor induced. Medicines or other methods are used to start labor. This is usually only done when the due date has passed or if a problem with the pregnancy risks the health of the mother or the fetus. 
Mothers and their babies are closely monitored during labor and delivery. Delivery can occur either vaginally through the birth canal, or if there are complications, the delivery may be done surgically by a Cesarean section. This is when the baby is taken out through your abdomen (belly) and uterus.  

What are the options for pain relief during childbirth?
The amount of pain during childbirth can vary based on the size and position of the baby, your level of comfort with the process, and the strength of your contractions. 

Options for pain relief during labor and delivery may include:
 
Medicines may reduce the pain, but they don't stop it completely.
Natural methods ease pain without taking medicines. A few examples include using relaxation techniques, a birthing ball, massage, or taking a bath or shower.
Combination of medicines and natural methods.
 

Discuss your options, risks, and benefits of pain relief during labor and delivery with your provider before your due date. 

  NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development