# Opioids and Opioid Use Disorder (OUD)

Source: MedlinePlus (medlineplus.gov)
Matched condition: Opioid abuse (disorder) (SNOMED-CT 5602001)
Link: https://medlineplus.gov/opioidsandopioidusedisorderoud.html?utm_source=mplusconnect&utm_medium=service

What are opioids?
Opioids, sometimes called narcotics, are a type of drug. They include strong prescription pain relievers such as oxycodone, hydrocodone, fentanyl, and tramadol. The illegal drug heroin is also an opioid. Some opioids are made from the opium plant, and others are synthetic (man-made).

A health care provider may give you a prescription opioid to reduce pain after you have had a major injury or surgery. You may get them if you have severe pain from health conditions like cancer.  Some providers prescribe them for chronic pain.

What are the side effects and risks of opioids?
Opioids can cause side effects such as drowsiness, mental fog, nausea, and constipation. They may also cause slowed breathing, which can lead to overdose deaths. If someone has signs of an overdose, call 911. These signs may include:

Very small pupils of the eyes
Falling asleep or loss of consciousness
Slow, shallow breathing
Choking or gurgling sounds
Vomiting
Limp body
Pale, blue, or cold skin
Faint heartbeat
Purple lips and fingernails


When using opioids, there is also a risk of opioid use disorder (OUD).

What is opioid use disorder (OUD)?

Opioid use disorder (OUD) means that you have a problematic pattern of using opioids. The pattern causes a lot of distress and impairment (meaning that it causes problems in and interferes with your daily life). Instead of OUD, sometimes people use the terms "opioid dependence" and "opioid addiction."  Dependence means feeling withdrawal symptoms when not taking the drug. Addiction is a chronic brain disease that causes a person to compulsively seek out drugs, even though they cause harm.
 
The risk of OUD is higher if you misuse the medicines. Misuse can include taking more than your prescribed dose or taking it more often, using it to get high, or taking someone else's opioids.

Opioid use disorder and overdoses are serious public health problems in the United States. As more people misuse opioids, more women are misusing opioids during pregnancy. This can lead to health risks for the mother and baby. The baby may be born with neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS).  NAS is a group of withdrawal symptoms that a baby has after being exposed to drugs during pregnancy. 

Another problem with increased opioid misuse is that it can also lead to more heroin use. There are some people who switch from prescription opioids to heroin because heroin may be cheaper and easier to get.

How are opioid use disorder (OUD) and opioid overdose treated?

There are effective medicines to treat OUD. Using medicines to treat OUD is called medications for opioid use disorder (MOUD). MOUD can help you stop using the drug, get through withdrawal, and cope with cravings. It is often combined with behavioral therapy and counseling.  Having support from family and friends can also help.

There is also a medicine called naloxone which can treat opioid overdoses. It can reverse the effects of the overdose and prevent death if it is given quickly.


How can I prevent problems when taking prescription opioids?
To prevent problems with prescription opioids, be sure to follow your doctor's instructions when taking them. Do not share your medicines with anyone else. Contact your doctor if you have any concerns about taking the medicines.

  NIH: National Institute on Drug Abuse