# Prenatal Care

Source: MedlinePlus (medlineplus.gov)
Matched condition: Routine antenatal care (SNOMED-CT 134435003)
Link: https://medlineplus.gov/prenatalcare.html?utm_source=mplusconnect&utm_medium=service

What is prenatal care?
Prenatal care is the health care you get while you are pregnant. It includes your checkups and prenatal testing. Typically, a health care provider specializing in the delivery of babies and the care of pregnant women, such as an obstetrician or a midwife, provides prenatal care. 

Why do I need prenatal care?
Prenatal care can help keep you and your fetus healthy until you're ready to deliver your baby. It lets your provider spot health problems early. Early treatment can cure many problems and prevent others from developing. 

Every prenatal visit offers you the chance to ask questions about having a healthy pregnancy and preparing for delivery. Talk to your provider about childbirth education classes for you and your partner to help you prepare for the birth of your baby.

How often do I need prenatal visits?
Your provider will give you a schedule for your prenatal visits. Usually, visits during your pregnancy occur:

Once a month for weeks 4 through 28 
Twice a month for weeks 28 through 36 
Weekly for week 36 until your baby is born


If you are over 35 years old or your pregnancy is high risk because of health problems like diabetes or high blood pressure, your provider will probably want to see you more often. You can also expect to see your provider more often as your due date gets closer. 

What happens during prenatal visits?
During prenatal visits, your provider will check your health and carefully monitor your pregnancy until you deliver your baby. 

Your first prenatal visit may take a little longer. Your provider will most likely:

Ask about your health history, including prior pregnancies
Ask about your family's health history
Discuss any health conditions and risk factors that could affect you or your fetus
Do a complete physical exam, including a pelvic exam and Pap test
Review blood, urine, or other routine prenatal lab tests
Check your blood pressure, height, and weight
Discuss a healthy amount of weight gain, healthy eating, and prenatal vitamins
Figure out your due date (when you are 40 weeks pregnant)


During most visits, your provider will most likely:

Check your blood pressure and weight gain
Measure your abdomen (belly) to check fetal growth once you begin to show
Check the fetal heart rate
Check your hands and feet for swelling
Do routine prenatal tests


Depending on the stage of your pregnancy, you may have additional tests.

Always talk to your provider before you start or stop any medicine. Some medicines can harm your fetus. To help keep yourself and your fetus healthy, avoid substances that could be harmful, such as tobacco, alcohol, and drugs.

  Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health